---
layout: post
author: "Simon Reid"
title:  "Season 2"
date:   2023-08-31 17:00:46 -0500
categories: "340"
---
Hello again, world!

I didn't think I would be writing another blog post, but only because I wasn't thinking very hard. I've been enrolled in [CSCI 340 Database and Web Systems][dws-home] since this spring, so of course I'm going to keep working on this journal - only this time for class credit!

Though my summer was enjoyable, I love to see campus alive and moving again. We had a terrible heat wave the last few weeks, but the weather has just recently begun cooling down to the 70-89°F range which feels _fantastic_ after such a brutal summer. A lot of people, myself included, will probably be doing more outdoor studying in the coming weeks. Of course, I'll do as much as is feasible for a computer science student.

Not all of my work is CSCI work this semester - in fact, this may be the last CSCI-majority semester I have. Other than CSCI 340, I'm taking [CSCI 382 Algorithms][algo-home] and MATH 270 Linear Algebra, for both of which I am excited and slightly nervous. However, to shake things up a bit and step out of my comfort zone, I'm also taking TART 140 Acting Fundamentals! I've been to a few of Hendrix's theatre shows in the past, and several of my friends have done theatre and really enjoyed it, so I figured it would be a refreshing break from sitting in front of an IDE or web browser all day. That's not to say it's easy, though - I have to practice projecting my voice and emphatically expressing emotions and facial expressions. Out of my wheelhouse, but I _am_ at a liberal arts college, so I want to make the most of my four years (especially since I only have two left!).

All that to say, although I won't have much academic motivation to continue posting on this blog after this semester, I'm still here for now. The CSCI 340 assignment I'm completing by writing this blog post requires me to create two web links and a list, but it also requires me to name the post "Introduction Post" and describe my experience setting up Ruby and Jekyll, so:

# Introduction Post
1. I already had Ruby on my computer
2. I started this blog three months ago
3. This is my sixth post
4. [two][linked-list] [links][linked-list]

[dws-home]: https://hendrix-cs.github.io/csci340
[algo-home]: https://hendrix-cs.github.io/csci382
[linked-list]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Doubly_linked_list
